---
title: Do you really mean S^1?
date: 2011-05-06T04:30:45+00:00
...


This is a follow up post to my [previous post](http://physjam.wordpress.com/2011/05/06/do-you-really-mean-rn/) on  $\mathbb{R}^n$ . Mathematicians will often write  $S^1$  without being clear of the context and structure associated with it.


<!--more-->


To a Euclidean geometer  $S^1$  means a circle – a maximal set of points equidistant from a given point. All circles are equivalent in the sense that they can be made equal by a translation and a scaling about the centre.


In a two dimensional inner product space  $S^1$  typically means the set of all points with norm 1. A circle is more generally the set of all points with norm r for some real number r and is related to  $S^1$  by a scaling transformation.


To a group theorist  $S^1$  would mean the one dimensional orthogonal group – the group of all transformations in the plane.


To a complex analyst  $S^1$  could mean either the set of points in  $\mathbb{C}$  with length 1 or it could be the group of linear transformations associated with multiplication by elements of this set. (These are quite different – in the set 1 has no special meaning but in the group it corresponds to the identity).


To a topologist  $S^1$  means anything homeomorphic to a Euclidean circle – so includes ellipses, polygons, simple closed curves,…


To a differential geometer  $S^1$  means anything diffeomorphic to a Euclidean circle, which doesn’t include “most” things a topologist means.


A set theorist wouldn’t call it  $S^1$ , but to her it would be any set with the same cardinality as the real numbers.


This is a major theme of category theory – it’s not only the objects that matter but also the maps that preserve them  – whether it be affine transformations, orthogonal transformations, group homomorphisms, group homomorphisms, homeomorphisms, diffeomorphisms or bijections. So if you must write  $S^1$  to represent a structure at least make sure it is clear which category you are working in – i.e. which maps preserve the structure.




 